Add PWA URL Handler article (#5424)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/pwa-url-handler/index.md

| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

## How to use PWAs as URL Handlers {: #use }

### Enabling via about://flags

To experiment with PWAs as URL Handlers locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#enable-desktop-pwas-url-handling` flag in `about://flags`.

{% Aside %} Support for the PWAs as URL Handlers feature is limited to desktop operating systems
like Window, macOS, and Linux. On Android, Chromium browsers install PWAs by generating a
[WebAPK](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/integration/webapks), which can register a
set of intent filters for all URLs within the scope of the app. This means that PWAs already handle
associated URLs on Android at the operating system level using intent filters. {% endAside %}

### The `"url_handlers"` web app manifest member

To associate an installed PWA with URL patterns, these patterns need to be specified in the web app

> manifest. This happens through the `"url_handlers"` member. It accepts an array of objects with the
> following property:
> 
> - `origin`: A required `string`, which is a pattern for matching origins. These patterns are allowed
>   to have a wildcard (`*`) prefix in order to include multiple sub-domains (like `*.example.com`).
>   URLs that match these origins could be handled by this web app. The scheme is always assumed to be
>   `https://`.

Author: ```suggestion
manifest. This happens through the `"url_handlers"` member. It accepts an array of objects with an `origin` property, which is a required `string` that is a pattern for matching origins. These patterns are allowed
to have a wildcard (`*`) prefix in order to include multiple sub-domains (like `*.example.com`).
URLs that match these origins could be handled by this web app. The scheme is always assumed to be
`https://`.
```

that the app also gets activated for `www.music.example.com` or potential other examples like
`marketing-activity.music.example.com`.

```json
{
  "url_handlers": [
    {
      "origin": "music.example.com"
    },
    {
      "origin": "*.music.example.com"
    },
    {
      "origin": "🎵.example.com"
    }
  ]
}
```

{%Aside %} While in an online scenario, short links from `🎵.example.com` would typically be
redirected to `music.example.com`. Such navigation redirection is not a good alternative with
respect to offline scenarios. Therefore the app needs to register for both origins. {% endAside %}

### The `web-app-origin-association` file

Since the PWA lives on a different origin (`music.example.com`) than some of the URLs it needs to
handle (e.g., `🎵.example.com`), the app needs to verify ownership of these other origins. This
happens in a `web-app-origin-association` file hosted on the other origins.

This file must contain valid JSON. The top-level structure is an object, with a member named
`"web_apps"`. This member is an array of objects and each object represents an entry for a unique
web app. Each object contains:

> | Field        | Required | Description                                                          | Type     | Default |
> | ------------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------- |
> | `"manifest"` | yes      | URL string of the web app manifest of the associated PWA             | `string` | N/A     |
> | `"details"`  | no       | An object that contains arrays of included and excluded URL patterns | `object` | N/A     |
> 
> Each `"details"` object contains:
> 
> | Field             | Required | Description                      | Type       | Default |
> | ----------------- | -------- | -------------------------------- | ---------- | ------- |
> | `"paths"`         | no       | Array of allowed path strings    | `string[]` | `[]`    |
> | `"exclude_paths"` | no       | Array of disallowed path strings | `string[]` | `[]`    |

Author: ```suggestion
| Field        | Description                                                          | Type     | Default |
| ------------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------- |
| `"manifest"` | (Required) URL string of the web app manifest of the associated PWA             | `string` | N/A     |
| `"details"`  | (Optional) An object that contains arrays of included and excluded URL patterns | `object` | N/A     |

Each `"details"` object contains:

| Field             | Description                      | Type       | Default |
| ----------------- | -------- | -------------------------------- | ---------- | ------- |
| `"paths"`         | (Optional) Array of allowed path strings    | `string[]` | `[]`    |
| `"exclude_paths"` | (Optional) Array of disallowed path strings | `string[]` | `[]`    |
```

  one of the registered URL patterns, the registered PWA will open.
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/EjFQNwv2IfINKykzsxxs.png
alt: |
  The Windows Skype instant messenger app next to the installed demo PWA, which is opened
  in standalone mode after clicking a link handled by it in a Skype chat message.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities
  - progressive-web-apps
---

{% Aside %} PWAs as URL Handlers is part of the [capabilities project](https://web.dev/fugu-status/)
and is currently in development. This post will be updated as the implementation progresses.
{% endAside %}

## What is PWAs as URL Handlers? {: #what }

Imagine you chat with a friend using an instant messenger application like Messages on macOS and you
talk about music. Further imagine you both have the `music.example.com` PWA installed on your
devices. If you want to share your favorite track for your friend to enjoy, you can send them a deep
link like `https://music.example.com/rick-astley/never-gonna-give-you-up`. Since this link is pretty
long, the developers of `music.example.com` may have decided to add an additional short link to each

> track, like, for example, `https://🎵.example.com/r-a/n-g-g-y-u`.

Author: Yes, thanks to the magic of Punycode (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emoji_domain#Emoji_subdomains)

PWA as URL Handlers is a proposal that allows apps like `music.example.com` to register themselves
as URL handlers for URLs that match patterns like `music.example.com`, `*.music.example.com`, or
`🎵.example.com`, so that links from outside of the PWA, for example, from an instant messenger
application or an email client, open in the installed PWA rather than in a browser tab.

> The PWA as URL Handlers proposal consists of two additions:

Author: ```suggestion
PWA as URL Handlers consists of two additions:
```

> The PWA as URL Handlers proposal consists of two additions:

Author: That's true. Changed.

> 1. The `"url_handlers"` Web App Manifest member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `"url_handlers"` web app manifest member.
```

Reviewer: Per the [handbook](https://web.dev/handbook/word-list/).

1. The `web-app-origin-association` file format for validating out-of-scope URL associations.

### Suggested use cases for PWAs as URL Handlers {: #use-cases }

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

> - Music or video streaming sites so track links or playlist links open in the player experience of

Reviewer: >player experience

You mean the view of the app lacking browser chrome, right? I think I inferred it because I work on Fugu all the time. Is there a better way to say this?

Author: Not necessarily, but this chrome-less view is one way.

  the app.

> - News or RSS readers so followed or subscribed-to sites open in the app's reader mode experience.

Reviewer: >reader mode experience

I have a similar problem here. Additionally, the words 'mode' and 'experience' seem to overlap in what they're communicating, a sort of half redundancy if you will.

Author: Fair. Just "reader mode" then.

| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

## How to use PWAs as URL Handlers {: #use }

### Enabling via about://flags

To experiment with PWAs as URL Handlers locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#enable-desktop-pwas-url-handling` flag in `about://flags`.

{% Aside %} Support for the PWAs as URL Handlers feature is limited to desktop operating systems
like Window, macOS, and Linux. On Android, Chromium browsers install PWAs by generating a
[WebAPK](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/integration/webapks), which can register a
set of intent filters for all URLs within the scope of the app. This means that PWAs already handle
associated URLs on Android at the operating system level using intent filters. {% endAside %}

> ### The `"url_handlers"` Web App Manifest member

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The `"url_handlers"` web app manifest member
```

> To associate an installed PWA with URL patterns, these patterns need to be specified in the Web App
> Manifest. This happens through the `"url_handlers"` member. It accepts an array of objects with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To associate an installed PWA with URL patterns, these patterns need to be specified in the web app
manifest. This happens through the `"url_handlers"` member. It accepts an array of objects with the
```

following property:

> - `origin`: A required `string`, which is a pattern for matching origins. These patterns are allowed

Reviewer: Maybe "with an `origin` property, which is a required string that..." If there's only one, you really shouldn't use a bullet with a run-in heading.

Author: Done, bullet be gone.

  to have a wildcard (`*`) prefix in order to include multiple sub-domains (like `*.example.com`).
  URLs that match these origins could be handled by this web app. The scheme is always assumed to be
  `https://`.

> The excerpt of a Web App Manifest below shows how the music PWA example from the introductory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The excerpt of a web app manifest below shows how the music PWA example from the introductory
```

paragraph could set this up. The second entry with the wildcard (`"*.music.example.com"`) makes sure
that the app also gets activated for `www.music.example.com` or potential other examples like
`marketing-activity.music.example.com`.

```json
{
  "url_handlers": [
    {
      "origin": "music.example.com"
    },
    {
      "origin": "*.music.example.com"
    },
    {
      "origin": "🎵.example.com"
    }
  ]
}
```

> {%Aside %} While in an online scenario short links from `🎵.example.com` would typically be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{%Aside %} While in an online scenario, short links from `🎵.example.com` would typically be
```

> redirected to `music.example.com`, such navigation redirection is not a good alternative with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
redirected to `music.example.com`. Such navigation redirection is not a good alternative with
```

Reviewer: Why isn't it a good alternative? Seems like you're leaving something out.

Author: Because the redirect can't be followed if the app is offline, but the link handling could still kick in and the app could see that it has the linked item (like a song) in its offline cache.

respect to offline scenarios. Therefore the app needs to register for both origins. {% endAside %}

### The `web-app-origin-association` file

Since the PWA lives on a different origin (`music.example.com`) than some of the URLs it needs to
handle (e.g., `🎵.example.com`), the app needs to verify ownership of these other origins. This

> happens in a `web-app-origin-association` file hosted on said other origins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
happens in a `web-app-origin-association` file hosted on the other origins.
```

> #### Structure of `web-app-origin-association` files

Reviewer: You probably don't need the heading. With only one paragraph before it and the table after it, which its nature is eye-catching, you probably don't need the landmark.

Author: OK, removed the heading.

> 
> #### Structure of `web-app-origin-association` files

Author: ```suggestion
```

This file must contain valid JSON. The top-level structure is an object, with a member named
`"web_apps"`. This member is an array of objects and each object represents an entry for a unique
web app. Each object contains:

| Field        | Required | Description                                                          | Type     | Default |
| ------------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------- |

> | `"manifest"` | yes      | URL string of the Web App Manifest of the associated PWA             | `string` | N/A     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `"manifest"` | yes      | URL string of the web app manifest of the associated PWA             | `string` | N/A     |
```

| `"details"`  | no       | An object that contains arrays of included and excluded URL patterns | `object` | N/A     |

Each `"details"` object contains:

| Field             | Required | Description                      | Type       | Default |
| ----------------- | -------- | -------------------------------- | ---------- | ------- |

> | `"paths"`         | no       | Array of allowed path strings    | `string[]` | `[]`    |

Reviewer: Horizontal scrolling is not a best practice. Here's a way to compress this that's common in tech writing practice.

| Field    | Description |
| -------- | ------------ |
| `"Paths"` | (Required) An array of allowed path strings. The default is `[]`. |

Author: Using this trick now :-)

| `"exclude_paths"` | no       | Array of disallowed path strings | `string[]` | `[]`    |

An example `web-app-origin-association` file for the music PWA example from above is given below. It
would be hosted on the origin `🎵.example.com` and establishes the association with the

> `music.example.com` PWA, identified by its Web App Manifest URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`music.example.com` PWA, identified by its web app manifest URL.
```

```json
{
  "web_apps": [
    {
      "manifest": "https://music.example.com/manifest.webappmanifest",
      "details": {
        "paths": ["/*"],
        "exclude_paths": ["/internal/*"]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

{% Aside %} The `web-app-origin-association` file is similar to
[Apple's associated domain file](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/safariservices/supporting_associated_domains_in_your_app#3001215),
[Android's `assetlinks.json` file](https://developer.android.com/training/app-links/verify-site-associations),
and
[Windows' `windows-app-web-link` file](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/launch-resume/web-to-app-linking#associate-your-app-and-website-with-a-json-file).
What differs is that the `web-app-origin-association` file does not reference PWAs using a

> platform-specific app ID, but by their Web App Manifest URL. {% endAside %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
platform-specific app ID, but by their web app manifest URL. {% endAside %}
```

#### When does a URL match?

> A PWA matches a URL for URL handling if both of the following conditions are fulfilled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PWA matches a URL for handling if both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
```

- The URL matches one of the origin strings in `"url_handlers"`.
- The browser is able to validate via the respective `web-app-origin-association` file that each
  origin agrees to let this app handle such a URL.

#### Regarding `web-app-origin-association` file discovery

For the browser to discover the `web-app-origin-association` file, developers have two choices.

- Add a `<link rel="web-app-origin-association">` element in the header section of the main document
  at the origin's root path that points at the `web-app-origin-association` file via the `href`
  attribute.

> - Alternatively, the `web-app-origin-association` file can also be placed in the
>   [`/.well-known/`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8615) folder at the root level of the
>   app. For this to work, the file name must exactly be `web-app-origin-association`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Place the `web-app-origin-association` file in the
  [`/.well-known/`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8615) folder at the root of the
  app. For this to work, the file name must exactly be `web-app-origin-association`.
```

## Demo

To test PWAs as URL Handlers, be sure to [set the browser flag](#enabling-via-about:flags) as
outlined above and then install the PWA at
[https://mandymsft.github.io/pwa/](https://mandymsft.github.io/pwa/). By looking at its

> [Web App Manifest](https://github.com/mandymsft/pwa/blob/main/manifest.json), you can see that it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[web app manifest](https://github.com/mandymsft/pwa/blob/main/manifest.json), you can see that it
```

> handles URLs from the following URL patterns: `https://mandymsft.github.io` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handles URLs with the following URL patterns: `https://mandymsft.github.io` and
```

`https://luhuangmsft.github.io`. Since the latter is on a different origin (`luhuangmsft.github.io`)
than the PWA, the PWA on `mandymsft.github.io` needs to prove ownership, which happens via the
`web-app-origin-association` file hosted at
[https://luhuangmsft.github.io/.well-known/web-app-origin-association](https://luhuangmsft.github.io/.well-known/web-app-origin-association).

To test that it is indeed working, send yourself a test message using an instant messaging app of

> your choice or an email that you view in an email client that is not web-based like Mail on macOS on
> your device with either of the links `https://mandymsft.github.io` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your choice or an email viewed in an email client that is not web-based like Mail on macOS. The email or text message should contain either of the links `https://mandymsft.github.io` or
```

Reviewer: I had trouble following the sentence as it was. I took a shot at what I think you're saying.

`https://luhuangmsft.github.io`. Both should open in the installed PWA.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/EjFQNwv2IfINKykzsxxs.png", alt="The Windows Skype instant messenger app next to the installed demo PWA, which is opened in standalone mode after clicking a link handled by it in a Skype chat message.", width="800", height="498" %}

## Security and permissions

The Chromium team has designed and implemented PWAs as URL Handlers using the core principles
defined in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis], including user
control, transparency, and ergonomics.

### User control

> If more than one PWA register as URL handlers for a given URL pattern, the user will be shown a
> prompt where they can choose which PWA they want to handle the pattern with—if any at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If more than one PWA registers as a URL handler for a given URL pattern, the user will be prompted
to choose which PWA they want to handle the pattern with—if any at all.
```

Navigations that start in a browser tab are not handled by this proposal, it is explicitly aimed at
navigations that start outside of the browser.

### Transparency

If the necessary association validation cannot be completed successfully during PWA installation for
any reason, the browser will not register the app as an active URL handler for the affected URLs.
URL handlers, if improperly implemented, can be used to hijack traffic for websites. This is why the

> app association mechanism is an important part of the proposed scheme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
app association mechanism is an important part of the scheme.
```

Platform-specific applications can already use operating system APIs to enumerate installed
applications on the user's system. For example, applications on Windows can use the
[`FindAppUriHandlersAsync`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/windows.system.launcher.findappurihandlersasync)
API to enumerate URL handlers. If PWAs register as OS level URL handlers in Windows, their presence
would be visible to other applications.

### Permission persistence

An origin could modify its associations with PWAs at any time. Browsers will regularly attempt to
revalidate the associations of installed web apps. If a URL handler registration fails to revalidate
because the association data has changed or is no longer available, the browser will remove

> registrations that are no longer valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
registrations.
```
